--- 
title: How to take notes if you're lazy
date: 2023-09-19  
description: Some thoughts on how to develop an uncomplicated notetaking system for those who don't like notetaking. 
--- 

In high school, my notetaking system was all over the place. For some classes, I had detailed, comprehensive, and organized notes and flashcards that legitimately helped me with preparing for tests and quizzes. On the flipside, I had courses where I barely wrote two incoherent lines on a single page. Why was that? 

It took me a long time to figure out that my notetaking system was highly dependent on how the instructor or teacher presented information. In my integral calculus class, my professor would actively write on his iPad which was then projected to the class on a large screen. Diligent students would write along with the professor as he solved problems, proved theorems, and provided commentary. It was no surprise that my GoodNotes5 notebook for this course was filled to the brim. Notetaking was a legitimately valuable task to do during lecture here. Especially with mathematics, practice-based learning always helped me more than memorizing definitions with no application. 

By contrast, I also took a statistics course that same semester in which the professor read his slides verbatim and produced barely any written examples in class. Taking notes in this class was useless. Everything the professor was saying came from a predetermined location that all of us had access to. It was so repetitive that there was no point in even attending class. I remember vividly meeting someone on the first day of class and then seeing them next on the day of the midterm. For this class, my notebook was practically empty. 

Next, there are seminar classes. These are more often than note humanities or social science courses with heavy reading loads. I took a literature seminar with nearly 300+ pages of reading per week. The professor encouraged us to take notes on the text. I attempted to write some in my notebook, pausing in-between my reading and noting down quotes or ideas that I found interesting. This proved to be dubiously inefficient; I had finished the reading at 3 am that night despite starting at 9 pm. So, I resorted to simply writing between the margins. It's funny because I also toured [Burke Library](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burke_Library) at The Union Theological Seminary as part of the class. The librarian showed us a collection of medieval books on display at the library. The one that stood out to me was a 500+ year old Bible that presumably belonged to a monk. What caught my eye were the margins; They were filled to the brim with notes and annotations!

Another significant, albeit more recent change, I have made to my notetaking is giving up my iPad. I still use it (to watch movies), but I have not taken any digital notes since starting my sophomore year. I started the iPad notetaking habit in junior year of high school after watching a slew of "Day in the Life of a Medical/College student" videos. There was also a fair bit of academic research (in particular, [this paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6446288/)) that highlighted the benefit of digital notes. Moreover, digital notetaking also streamlined the submission process for problem sets. It was simple: write the notes, download the pdf, and upload directly to courseworks. There's also an ease of erasing mistakes (which are surprisingly common in math), a simple double tap on the Apple Pencil and away your errors went. These are alot of verifiably good reasons to keep notetaking on an iPad, so there must have been an even better reason to switch right? Nope! I simply felt better notetaking on paper. It was purely psychological. I often remembered information I wrote down on pen and paper more frequently compared to GoodNotes after some time had passed. 

To wrap this all up, the title of this essay is "How to take notes if you're lazy" and there is no textbook solution to that. It's more of an artform, a ballparking intuition, a subconscious effort. The main idea is to find a system of taking notes that works best for you. Here are some criteria: 
- Not overwhelmingly time-consuming to the point of inefficiency.
- Effective for your specific course/subject (biology notes don't work for mathematics and vice versa) 
- Easy to setup and get started within a minute (it shouldn't take you long to start taking notes).

Regarding the two points, a great many people find pleasure in aesthetically augmenting their notes with highlighting, post-its, drawings and doodles, and other additions. This is great but also time consuming. I have to reiterate that this guide is for people whose are not intense notetakers, but find that simply going to class and listening to the teacher talk is not enough to retain information. If you are an "aesthetic" notetaker, please take everything here with a grain of salt. 

# My current system: one notebook to rule them all!

One black [XL Moleskine](https://www.amazon.com/Moleskine-Classic-Cover-Notebook-Ruled/dp/8883707222?th=1) notebook for everything. I usually draw a line between notetaking sessions and subtitle it with the course and date to organize it to some degree. I personally value having everything in one place versus pure organization. Again, it will be different for everyone. In comparison to the iPad/GoodNotes5 + Apple Pencil system, this is pretty cost effective: one notebook and one blue/black pen or a pencil. However, Moleskine books are known to be costly, so use whatever notebook you like.  
